docs/guides/mcp-tools.md, before:

# MCP & Tool Calling

vllm-mlx supports the Model Context Protocol (MCP) for integrating external tools with LLMs.

## How Tool Calling Works

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                          Tool Calling Flow                          │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│                                                                     │
│  1. User Request                                                    │
│     ─────────────────►  "List files in /tmp"                       │
│                                                                     │
│  2. LLM Generates Tool Call                                         │
│     ─────────────────►  tool_calls: [{                             │
│                           name: "list_directory",                   │
│                           arguments: {path: "/tmp"}                 │
│                         }]                                          │
│                                                                     │
│  3. App Executes Tool via MCP                                       │
│     ─────────────────►  MCP Server executes list_directory         │
│                         Returns: ["file1.txt", "file2.txt"]        │
│                                                                     │
│  4. Tool Result Sent Back to LLM                                    │
│     ─────────────────►  role: "tool", content: [...]               │
│                                                                     │
│  5. LLM Generates Final Response                                    │
│     ─────────────────►  "The /tmp directory contains 2 files..."   │
│                                                                     │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Quick Start

### 1. Create MCP Config

Create `mcp.json`:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "filesystem": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem", "/tmp"]
    }
  }
}
```

### 2. Start Server with MCP

```bash
# Simple mode
vllm-mlx serve mlx-community/Qwen3-4B-4bit --mcp-config mcp.json

# Continuous batching
vllm-mlx serve mlx-community/Qwen3-4B-4bit --mcp-config mcp.json --continuous-batching
```

### 3. Verify MCP Status

```bash
# Check MCP status
curl http://localhost:8000/v1/mcp/status

# List available tools
curl http://localhost:8000/v1/mcp/tools
```

## Tool Calling Example

```python
import json
import httpx

BASE_URL = "http://localhost:8000"

# 1. Get available tools
tools_response = httpx.get(f"{BASE_URL}/v1/mcp/tools")
tools = tools_response.json()["tools"]

# 2. Send request with tools
response = httpx.post(
    f"{BASE_URL}/v1/chat/completions",
    json={
        "model": "default",
        "messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "List files in /tmp"}],
        "tools": tools,
        "max_tokens": 1024
    }
)

result = response.json()
message = result["choices"][0]["message"]

# 3. Check for tool calls
if message.get("tool_calls"):
    tool_call = message["tool_calls"][0]

    # 4. Execute tool via MCP
    exec_response = httpx.post(
        f"{BASE_URL}/v1/mcp/execute",
        json={
            "server": "filesystem",
            "tool": tool_call["function"]["name"],
            "arguments": json.loads(tool_call["function"]["arguments"])
        }
    )
    tool_result = exec_response.json()

    # 5. Send result back to LLM
    messages = [
        {"role": "user", "content": "List files in /tmp"},
        message,
        {
            "role": "tool",
            "tool_call_id": tool_call["id"],
            "content": json.dumps(tool_result["result"])
        }
    ]

    final_response = httpx.post(
        f"{BASE_URL}/v1/chat/completions",
        json={"model": "default", "messages": messages}
    )
    print(final_response.json()["choices"][0]["message"]["content"])
```

## MCP Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/v1/mcp/status` | GET | Check MCP status |
| `/v1/mcp/tools` | GET | List available tools |
| `/v1/mcp/execute` | POST | Execute a tool |

## Example MCP Servers

### Filesystem

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "filesystem": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem", "/tmp"]
    }
  }
}
```

### GitHub

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "github": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-github"],
      "env": {
        "GITHUB_TOKEN": "your-token"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### PostgreSQL

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "postgres": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-postgres"],
      "env": {
        "DATABASE_URL": "postgresql://user:pass@localhost/db"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Brave Search

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "brave-search": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-brave-search"],
      "env": {
        "BRAVE_API_KEY": "your-key"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Multiple MCP Servers

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "filesystem": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem", "/tmp"]
    },
    "github": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-github"],
      "env": {
        "GITHUB_TOKEN": "your-token"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Interactive MCP Chat

For testing MCP interactively:

```bash
python examples/mcp_chat.py
```

## Supported Tool Formats

vllm-mlx parses tool calls from both Qwen and Llama formats:

- Qwen: `<tool_call>{"name": "...", "arguments": {...}}</tool_call>`
- Llama: `{"name": "...", "parameters": {...}}`

## Security

vllm-mlx includes security measures to prevent command injection attacks via MCP servers.

### Command Whitelist

Only trusted commands are allowed by default:

| Category | Allowed Commands |
|----------|-----------------|
| Node.js | `npx`, `npm`, `node` |
| Python | `uvx`, `uv`, `python`, `python3`, `pip`, `pipx` |
| Docker | `docker` |
| MCP Servers | `mcp-server-*` (official servers) |

### Blocked Patterns

The following patterns are blocked to prevent injection attacks:

- Command chaining: `;`, `&&`, `||`, `|`
- Command substitution: `` ` ``, `$()`
- Path traversal: `../`
- Dangerous env vars: `LD_PRELOAD`, `PATH`, `PYTHONPATH`

### Example: Blocked Attack

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "malicious": {
      "command": "bash",
      "args": ["-c", "rm -rf /"]
    }
  }
}
```

This config will be rejected:
```
ValueError: MCP server 'malicious': Command 'bash' is not in the allowed commands whitelist.
```

### Development Mode (Unsafe)

For development only, you can bypass security validation:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "custom": {
      "command": "my-custom-server",
      "skip_security_validation": true
    }
  }
}
```

**WARNING**: Never use `skip_security_validation` in production!

### Custom Whitelist

To add custom commands to the whitelist programmatically:

```python
from vllm_mlx.mcp import MCPCommandValidator, set_validator

# Add custom commands
validator = MCPCommandValidator(
    custom_whitelist={"my-trusted-server", "another-server"}
)
set_validator(validator)
```

## Tool Execution Sandboxing

Beyond command validation, vllm-mlx provides runtime sandboxing for tool executions:

### Sandbox Features

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| Tool Allowlisting | Only permit specific tools to execute |
| Tool Blocklisting | Block specific dangerous tools |
| Argument Validation | Block dangerous patterns in tool arguments |
| Rate Limiting | Limit tool calls per minute |
| Audit Logging | Track all tool executions |

### Blocked Argument Patterns

Tool arguments are validated for dangerous patterns:

- Path traversal: `../`
- System directories: `/etc/`, `/proc/`, `/sys/`
- Root access: `/root/`, `~root`

### High-Risk Tool Detection

Tools matching these patterns trigger security warnings:

- `execute`, `run_command`, `shell`, `eval`, `exec`, `system`, `subprocess`

### Custom Sandbox Configuration

```python
from vllm_mlx.mcp import ToolSandbox, set_sandbox

# Create sandbox with custom settings
sandbox = ToolSandbox(
    # Only allow specific tools (whitelist mode)
    allowed_tools={"read_file", "list_directory"},

    # Block specific tools (blacklist mode)
    blocked_tools={"execute_command", "run_shell"},

    # Rate limit: max 30 calls per minute
    max_calls_per_minute=30,

    # Optional audit callback
    audit_callback=lambda audit: print(f"Tool: {audit.tool_name}, Success: {audit.success}"),
)
set_sandbox(sandbox)
```

### Accessing Audit Logs

```python
from vllm_mlx.mcp import get_sandbox

sandbox = get_sandbox()

# Get recent audit entries
entries = sandbox.get_audit_log(limit=50)

# Filter by tool name
file_ops = sandbox.get_audit_log(tool_filter="file")

# Get only errors
errors = sandbox.get_audit_log(errors_only=True)

# Clear audit log
sandbox.clear_audit_log()
```

### Sensitive Data Redaction

Audit logs automatically redact sensitive fields (password, token, secret, key, credential, auth) and truncate large values.

## Troubleshooting

### MCP server not connecting

Check that the MCP server command is correct:
```bash
npx -y @modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem /tmp
```

### Tool not executing

Verify tool is available:
```bash
curl http://localhost:8000/v1/mcp/tools | jq '.tools[].name'
```

### Tool call not parsed

Ensure you're using a model that supports function calling (Qwen3, Llama-3.2-Instruct).

### Command not in whitelist

If you see "Command X is not in the allowed commands whitelist", either:
1. Use an allowed command (see whitelist above)
2. Add the command to a custom whitelist
3. Use `skip_security_validation: true` (development only)

Commit message:

Update tool calling docs with all 12 parsers and new CLI flags

docs/guides/mcp-tools.md, after:

# MCP & Tool Calling

vllm-mlx supports the Model Context Protocol (MCP) for integrating external tools with LLMs.

## How Tool Calling Works

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                          Tool Calling Flow                          │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│                                                                     │
│  1. User Request                                                    │
│     ─────────────────►  "List files in /tmp"                       │
│                                                                     │
│  2. LLM Generates Tool Call                                         │
│     ─────────────────►  tool_calls: [{                             │
│                           name: "list_directory",                   │
│                           arguments: {path: "/tmp"}                 │
│                         }]                                          │
│                                                                     │
│  3. App Executes Tool via MCP                                       │
│     ─────────────────►  MCP Server executes list_directory         │
│                         Returns: ["file1.txt", "file2.txt"]        │
│                                                                     │
│  4. Tool Result Sent Back to LLM                                    │
│     ─────────────────►  role: "tool", content: [...]               │
│                                                                     │
│  5. LLM Generates Final Response                                    │
│     ─────────────────►  "The /tmp directory contains 2 files..."   │
│                                                                     │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Quick Start

### 1. Create MCP Config

Create `mcp.json`:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "filesystem": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem", "/tmp"]
    }
  }
}
```

### 2. Start Server with MCP

```bash
# Simple mode
vllm-mlx serve mlx-community/Qwen3-4B-4bit --mcp-config mcp.json

# Continuous batching
vllm-mlx serve mlx-community/Qwen3-4B-4bit --mcp-config mcp.json --continuous-batching
```

### 3. Verify MCP Status

```bash
# Check MCP status
curl http://localhost:8000/v1/mcp/status

# List available tools
curl http://localhost:8000/v1/mcp/tools
```

## Tool Calling Example

```python
import json
import httpx

BASE_URL = "http://localhost:8000"

# 1. Get available tools
tools_response = httpx.get(f"{BASE_URL}/v1/mcp/tools")
tools = tools_response.json()["tools"]

# 2. Send request with tools
response = httpx.post(
    f"{BASE_URL}/v1/chat/completions",
    json={
        "model": "default",
        "messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "List files in /tmp"}],
        "tools": tools,
        "max_tokens": 1024
    }
)

result = response.json()
message = result["choices"][0]["message"]

# 3. Check for tool calls
if message.get("tool_calls"):
    tool_call = message["tool_calls"][0]

    # 4. Execute tool via MCP
    exec_response = httpx.post(
        f"{BASE_URL}/v1/mcp/execute",
        json={
            "server": "filesystem",
            "tool": tool_call["function"]["name"],
            "arguments": json.loads(tool_call["function"]["arguments"])
        }
    )
    tool_result = exec_response.json()

    # 5. Send result back to LLM
    messages = [
        {"role": "user", "content": "List files in /tmp"},
        message,
        {
            "role": "tool",
            "tool_call_id": tool_call["id"],
            "content": json.dumps(tool_result["result"])
        }
    ]

    final_response = httpx.post(
        f"{BASE_URL}/v1/chat/completions",
        json={"model": "default", "messages": messages}
    )
    print(final_response.json()["choices"][0]["message"]["content"])
```

## MCP Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/v1/mcp/status` | GET | Check MCP status |
| `/v1/mcp/tools` | GET | List available tools |
| `/v1/mcp/execute` | POST | Execute a tool |

## Example MCP Servers

### Filesystem

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "filesystem": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem", "/tmp"]
    }
  }
}
```

### GitHub

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "github": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-github"],
      "env": {
        "GITHUB_TOKEN": "your-token"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### PostgreSQL

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "postgres": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-postgres"],
      "env": {
        "DATABASE_URL": "postgresql://user:pass@localhost/db"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Brave Search

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "brave-search": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-brave-search"],
      "env": {
        "BRAVE_API_KEY": "your-key"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Multiple MCP Servers

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "filesystem": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem", "/tmp"]
    },
    "github": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@modelcontextprotocol/server-github"],
      "env": {
        "GITHUB_TOKEN": "your-token"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Interactive MCP Chat

For testing MCP interactively:

```bash
python examples/mcp_chat.py
```

## Supported Tool Formats

vllm-mlx supports 12 tool call parsers covering all major model families. See [Tool Calling](tool-calling.md) for the full list of parsers, aliases, and examples.

## Security

vllm-mlx includes security measures to prevent command injection attacks via MCP servers.

### Command Whitelist

Only trusted commands are allowed by default:

| Category | Allowed Commands |
|----------|-----------------|
| Node.js | `npx`, `npm`, `node` |
| Python | `uvx`, `uv`, `python`, `python3`, `pip`, `pipx` |
| Docker | `docker` |
| MCP Servers | `mcp-server-*` (official servers) |

### Blocked Patterns

The following patterns are blocked to prevent injection attacks:

- Command chaining: `;`, `&&`, `||`, `|`
- Command substitution: `` ` ``, `$()`
- Path traversal: `../`
- Dangerous env vars: `LD_PRELOAD`, `PATH`, `PYTHONPATH`

### Example: Blocked Attack

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "malicious": {
      "command": "bash",
      "args": ["-c", "rm -rf /"]
    }
  }
}
```

This config will be rejected:
```
ValueError: MCP server 'malicious': Command 'bash' is not in the allowed commands whitelist.
```

### Development Mode (Unsafe)

For development only, you can bypass security validation:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "custom": {
      "command": "my-custom-server",
      "skip_security_validation": true
    }
  }
}
```

**WARNING**: Never use `skip_security_validation` in production!

### Custom Whitelist

To add custom commands to the whitelist programmatically:

```python
from vllm_mlx.mcp import MCPCommandValidator, set_validator

# Add custom commands
validator = MCPCommandValidator(
    custom_whitelist={"my-trusted-server", "another-server"}
)
set_validator(validator)
```

## Tool Execution Sandboxing

Beyond command validation, vllm-mlx provides runtime sandboxing for tool executions:

### Sandbox Features

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| Tool Allowlisting | Only permit specific tools to execute |
| Tool Blocklisting | Block specific dangerous tools |
| Argument Validation | Block dangerous patterns in tool arguments |
| Rate Limiting | Limit tool calls per minute |
| Audit Logging | Track all tool executions |

### Blocked Argument Patterns

Tool arguments are validated for dangerous patterns:

- Path traversal: `../`
- System directories: `/etc/`, `/proc/`, `/sys/`
- Root access: `/root/`, `~root`

### High-Risk Tool Detection

Tools matching these patterns trigger security warnings:

- `execute`, `run_command`, `shell`, `eval`, `exec`, `system`, `subprocess`

### Custom Sandbox Configuration

```python
from vllm_mlx.mcp import ToolSandbox, set_sandbox

# Create sandbox with custom settings
sandbox = ToolSandbox(
    # Only allow specific tools (whitelist mode)
    allowed_tools={"read_file", "list_directory"},

    # Block specific tools (blacklist mode)
    blocked_tools={"execute_command", "run_shell"},

    # Rate limit: max 30 calls per minute
    max_calls_per_minute=30,

    # Optional audit callback
    audit_callback=lambda audit: print(f"Tool: {audit.tool_name}, Success: {audit.success}"),
)
set_sandbox(sandbox)
```

### Accessing Audit Logs

```python
from vllm_mlx.mcp import get_sandbox

sandbox = get_sandbox()

# Get recent audit entries
entries = sandbox.get_audit_log(limit=50)

# Filter by tool name
file_ops = sandbox.get_audit_log(tool_filter="file")

# Get only errors
errors = sandbox.get_audit_log(errors_only=True)

# Clear audit log
sandbox.clear_audit_log()
```

### Sensitive Data Redaction

Audit logs automatically redact sensitive fields (password, token, secret, key, credential, auth) and truncate large values.

## Troubleshooting

### MCP server not connecting

Check that the MCP server command is correct:
```bash
npx -y @modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem /tmp
```

### Tool not executing

Verify tool is available:
```bash
curl http://localhost:8000/v1/mcp/tools | jq '.tools[].name'
```

### Tool call not parsed

Ensure you're using a model that supports function calling (Qwen3, Llama-3.2-Instruct).

### Command not in whitelist

If you see "Command X is not in the allowed commands whitelist", either:
1. Use an allowed command (see whitelist above)
2. Add the command to a custom whitelist
3. Use `skip_security_validation: true` (development only)
