docs/benchmarks/README.md, before:

# Benchmarks

Performance benchmarks for vllm-mlx on Apple Silicon.

## Benchmark Types

- [LLM Benchmarks](llm.md) - Text generation performance
- [Image Benchmarks](image.md) - Image understanding performance
- [Video Benchmarks](video.md) - Video understanding performance

## Quick Commands

```bash
# LLM benchmark
vllm-mlx-bench --model mlx-community/Qwen3-0.6B-8bit

# Image benchmark
vllm-mlx-bench --model mlx-community/Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct-4bit

# Video benchmark
vllm-mlx-bench --model mlx-community/Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct-4bit --video
```

## Standalone Test Defaults

Standalone benchmark test scripts have built-in default models, so you can run:

```bash
python tests/test_continuous_batching.py
python tests/test_prefix_cache.py
```

Defaults:
- `tests/test_continuous_batching.py` → `mlx-community/Qwen3-8B-6bit`
- `tests/test_prefix_cache.py` → `mlx-community/Qwen3-0.6B-8bit`

To test different models, use the optional `--model` flag:

```bash
python tests/test_continuous_batching.py --model mlx-community/Qwen3-0.6B-8bit
python tests/test_prefix_cache.py --model mlx-community/Qwen3-8B-6bit
```

## Hardware

Benchmarks have been collected on the following Apple Silicon configurations:

| Chip | Memory | Python |
|------|--------|--------|
| Apple M4 Max | 128 GB unified | 3.13 |
| Apple M1 Max | 64 GB unified | 3.12 |

Results will vary on different Apple Silicon chips.

## Contributing Benchmarks

If you have a different Apple Silicon chip, please share your results:

```bash
vllm-mlx-bench --model mlx-community/Qwen3-0.6B-8bit --output results.json
```

Open an issue with your results at [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/waybarrios/vllm-mlx/issues).

Commit message:

Refocus README on fork benefits and add compatibility notes

docs/benchmarks/README.md, after:

# Benchmarks

Performance benchmarks for vllm-mlx on Apple Silicon.

## Benchmark Types

- [LLM Benchmarks](llm.md) - Text generation performance
- [Image Benchmarks](image.md) - Image understanding performance
- [Video Benchmarks](video.md) - Video understanding performance
- [Fork Benefits](fork-benefits.md) - Compatibility and reliability outcomes from fork changes

## Quick Commands

```bash
# LLM benchmark
vllm-mlx-bench --model mlx-community/Qwen3-0.6B-8bit

# Image benchmark
vllm-mlx-bench --model mlx-community/Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct-4bit

# Video benchmark
vllm-mlx-bench --model mlx-community/Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct-4bit --video
```

## Standalone Test Defaults

Standalone benchmark test scripts have built-in default models, so you can run:

```bash
python tests/test_continuous_batching.py
python tests/test_prefix_cache.py
```

Defaults:
- `tests/test_continuous_batching.py` → `mlx-community/Qwen3-8B-6bit`
- `tests/test_prefix_cache.py` → `mlx-community/Qwen3-0.6B-8bit`

To test different models, use the optional `--model` flag:

```bash
python tests/test_continuous_batching.py --model mlx-community/Qwen3-0.6B-8bit
python tests/test_prefix_cache.py --model mlx-community/Qwen3-8B-6bit
```

## Hardware

Benchmarks have been collected on the following Apple Silicon configurations:

| Chip | Memory | Python |
|------|--------|--------|
| Apple M4 Max | 128 GB unified | 3.13 |
| Apple M1 Max | 64 GB unified | 3.12 |

Results will vary on different Apple Silicon chips.

## Contributing Benchmarks

If you have a different Apple Silicon chip, please share your results:

```bash
vllm-mlx-bench --model mlx-community/Qwen3-0.6B-8bit --output results.json
```

Open an issue with your results at [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/waybarrios/vllm-mlx/issues).
